---
title: Ansi
date: 2015-03-04
categories: ruby
layout: post
---

Most everyone has seen some ruby that will output in color,
and maybe used a gem to put out text in colors.
How does that actually work?

### Ansi Escape Sequences

All ansi escape sequences do are call "functions" to do
something to your terminal. These functions are things like
moving the cursor around, scrolling,
or of course setting colors.

To call an ansi "function", you need a certain escape
sequence so that your terminal will pick it up.
In ruby, we can do this with the string:

```ruby
"\e["
```

This lets your shell know that you want to call a function.
To actually use a function, you then need to give it some
arguments and the function you want to use.
To use the coloring function, you need to give the character `"m"`,
with arguments for the text and background colors.
Numbers in the 30s range will change the text color,
numbers in the 40s range will change the background color.

In use, this would look like

```ruby
"\e[34;41m"
```

What this will do is set your terminal background color and
text color for every character that follows it until the colors are changed.
Because of this, most gems and such will put a tag on either
side of your string to first set the color, then change back to defaults.

If you want to try this out,
change the ones digit number for 34 and 41 to see a color change.

```ruby
puts "\e[34;41m Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit."
```

### The Syntax

As you may notice from this garbage looking string,
ansi sequences must follow a certain syntax.
In general, you will have

```ruby
"\e[#{args}#{function}"
```

`args` in this case is going to be numbers separated by semicolons,
where the numbers mean something different depending on the function.

### A Practical Use

So a cool part of using ANSI codes is that you can rewrite
over what you already have by moving the cursor backwards.
I'll use some of this to make an example of a loading bar.

The first thing we want is some sort of bar that looks like its loading.
For this example, I'm just going to use dots like this:

```ruby
100.times do |i|
  puts ". " * (i % 20)
  sleep(0.1)
end
```

All this does is print out some more dots every loop until it hits 20,
which it then resets back to 0 dots. Now we need some cool ANSI
functionality to make it draw back over itself. The first thing
we can easily pull off, is to move the cursor up 1 after the `puts`.
The ANSI `A` function moves our cursor up, and we only need give
it arguments for how far up, in this case `1`.

```ruby
100.times do |i|
  puts ". " * (i % 20)
  sleep(0.1)
  print "\e[1A"
end
```

The reason I use `print` here for moving up is because `puts`
will add a newline at the end if the string doesn't have one,
which will just move our cursor back down and accomplish nothing.

Now this bar looks pretty good but it's missing something.
What we need is a way to clear the bar if it's at full
so the next set of dots can start slowly showing up.
Thankfully for us, there's a function that deletes all
characters in a line for us. `K` will delete characters on the
current line with an argument for before cursor,
after cursor or both. I'll give it the `2` argument
to clear both sides.

```ruby
100.times do |i|
  puts ". " * (i % 20)
  sleep(0.1)
  print "\e[1A\e[2K"
end
```

Now of course we need some cool colors to make this complete.

```ruby
100.times do |i|
  print "\e[37;43m"
  puts (". " * (i % 20)) + "\e[39;49m"
  sleep(0.1)
  print "\e[1A\e[2K"
end
```

**Note**: The `"\e[39;49m"` here will set the terminal back to default
colors so that the newline from `puts` isn't colored
